=head1 NAME

"Perl 5 to 6" Lesson 26 - Exceptions and control exceptions

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    try {
        my $x = 1 / 0; # dies with 'Divide by zero'

        CATCH { 
            say "there was an error: $!";
        }
    }


=head1 DESCRIPTION

Exceptions are, contrary to their name, nothing exceptional. In fact they are
part of the normal control flow of programs in Perl 6.

Exceptions are generated either by implicit errors (for example dividing by
zero, calling a non-existing method, type check failures) or by explicitly
calling C<die> or other functions.

When an exception is thrown, the program searches for C<CATCH> statements or
C<try> blocks in the caller frames, unwinding the stack all the way (that
means it forcibly returns from all routines called so far). If no C<CATCH> or
C<try> is found, the program terminates, and prints out a hopefully helpful
error message. If one was found, the error message is stored in the special
variable C<$!>, and the C<CATCH> block is executed (or in the case of a
C<try> without a CATCH block the try block returns C<undef>).

So far exceptions might still sound exceptional, but error handling is
integral part of each non-trivial application. But even more, normal C<return>
statements also throw exceptions!

They are called I<control exceptions>, and can be caught with C<CONTROL>
blocks, or are implicitly caught at each routine declaration.

Consider this example:

    use v6;
    my $block = -> { return "block"; say "still here" };

    sub s {
        $block.();
        return "sub";
    }

    say s();

Here the C<return "block"> throws a control exception, causing it to not only
exit the current block (and thus not printing C<still here> on the screen),
but also exiting the subroutine, where it is caught by the C<sub s...>
declaration. The payload, here a string, is handed back as the return value,
and the C<say> in the last line prints it to the screen.

Embedding the call C<$block.()> in a C<try { ... }> block or adding a
C<CONTROL { ... }> block to the body of the routine causes it to catch the
exception.

Contrary to what other programming languages do, the C<CATCH>/C<CONTROL>
blocks are within the scope in which the error is caught (not on the outside),
giving it full access to the lexical variables, which makes it easier to
generate useful error message, and also prevents DESTROY blocks from being run
before the error is handled.

=head2 Unthrown exceptions

Perl 6 embraces the idea of multi threading, and in particular automated
parallelization. To make sure that not all threads suffer from the termination
of a single thread, a kind of "soft" exception was invented.

When a function calls C<fail($obj)>, it returns a special value of C<undef>,
which contains the payload C<$obj> (usually an error message) and the back
trace (file name and line number). Processing that special undefined value
without check if it's undefined causes a normal exception to be thrown.

    my @files = </etc/passwd /etc/shadow nonexisting>;
    my @handles = hyper map { open($_) }, @files;

In this example the C<hyper> operator tells C<map> to parallelize its actions
as far as possible. When the opening of the C<nonexisting> file fails, an
ordinary C<die "No such file or directory"> would also abort the execution of
all other C<open> operations. But since a failed open calls C<fail("No such
file or directory"> instead, it gives the caller the possibility to check the
contents of C<@handles>, and it I<still has access to the full error message>.

If you don't like soft exceptions, you say C<use fatal;> at the start of the
program and cause all exceptions from C<fail()> to be thrown immediately.

=head1 MOTIVATION

A good programming language needs exceptions to handle error conditions.
Always checking return values for success is a plague and easily forgotten.

Since traditional exceptions can be poisonous for implicit parallelism, we
needed a solution that combined the best of both worlds: not killing
everything at once, and still not loosing any information.

=for time 1247130002
=for editor vim: spell
