=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

"Perl 5 to 6" Lesson 27 - Common Perl 6 data processing idioms

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  # create a hash from a list of keys and values:
  # solution 1: slices
  my %hash; %hash{@keys} = @values;
  # solution 2: meta operators
  my %hash = @keys Z=> @values;

  # create a hash from an array, with
  # true value for each array item:
  my %exists = @keys Z=> 1 xx *;

  # limit a value to a given range, here 0..10.
  my $x = -2;
  say 0 max $x min 10;

  # for debugging: dump the contents of a variable,
  # including its name, to STDERR
  note :$x.perl;

  # sort case-insensitively
  say @list.sort: *.lc;

  # mandatory attributes
  class Something {
      has $.required = die "Attribute 'required' is mandatory";
  }
  Something.new(required => 2); # no error
  Something.new()               # BOOM


=head1 DESCRIPTION

Learning the specification of a language is not enough to be productive with
it. Rather you need to know how to solve specific problems. Common usage
patterns, called I<idioms>, helps you not having to re-invent the wheel every
time you're faced with a problem.

So here a some common Perl 6 idioms, dealing with data structures.

=head2 Hashes

  # create a hash from a list of keys and values:
  # solution 1: slices
  my %hash; %hash{@keys} = @values;
  # solution 2: meta operators
  my %hash = @keys Z=> @values;

The first solution is the same you'd use in Perl 5: assignment to a slice. The
second solution uses the zip operator C<Z>, which joins to list like a zip
fastener: C<1, 2, 3 Z 10, 20, 30> is C<1, 10, 2, 20, 3, 30>. The C<< Z=> >> is
a meta operator, which combines zip with C<< => >> (the Pair construction
operator). So C<< 1, 2, 3 Z=> 10, 20, 30 >> evaluates to
C<< 1 => 10, 2 => 20, 3 => 30 >>. Assignment to a hash variable turns that
into a Hash.

For existence checks, the values in a hash often doesn't matter, as long as
they all evaluate to C<True> in boolean context. In that case, a nice way to
initialize the hash from a given array or list of keys is

  my %exists = @keys Z=> 1 xx *;

which uses a lazy, infinite list of 1s on the right-hand side, and relies on
the fact that C<Z> ends when the shorter list is exhausted.

=head2 Numbers

Sometimes you want to get a number from somewhere, but clip it into a
predefined range (for example so that it can act as an array index).

In Perl 5 you often end up with things like
C<< $a = $b > $upper ? $upper : $b >>, and another conditional for the lower
limit. With the C<max> and C<min> infix
operators, that simplifies considerably to

  my $in-range = $lower max $x min $upper;

because C<$lower max $x> returns the larger of the two numbers, and thus
clipping to the lower end of the range.

Since C<min> and C<max> are infix operators, you can also clip infix:

 $x max= 0;
 $x min= 10;

=head2 Debugging

Perl 5 has Data::Dumper, Perl 6 objects have the C<.perl> method. Both
generate code that reproduces the original data structure as faithfully as possible.

C<:$var> generates a Pair ("colonpair"), using the variable name as key
(but with sigil stripped). So it's the same as C<< var => $var >>. C<note()>
writes to the standard error stream, appending a newline. So C<note
:$var.perl> is quick way of obtaining the value of a variable for debugging;
purposes, along with its name.

=head2 Sorting

Like in Perl 5, the C<sort> built-in can take a function that compares two
values, and then sorts according to that comparison. Unlike Perl 5, it's a bit
smarter, and automatically does a transformation for you if the function takes
only one argument.

In general, if you want to compare by a transformed value, in Perl 5 you can
do:

    # WARNING: Perl 5 code ahead
    my @sorted = sort { transform($a) cmp transform($b) } @values;

    # or the so-called Schwartzian Transform:
    my @sorted = map { $_->[1] }
                 sort { $a->[0] cmp $b->[0] }
                 map { [transform($_), $_] }
                 @values

The former solution requires repetitive typing of the transformation, and
executes it for each comparison. The second solution avoids that by storing
the transformed value along with the original value, but it's quite a bit of
code to write.

Perl 6 automates the second solution (and a bit more efficient than the naiive
Schwartzian transform, by avoiding an array for each value) when the
transformation function has arity one, ie accepts one argument only:

    my @sorted = sort &transform, @values;

=head2 Mandatory Attributes

The typical way to enforce the presence of an attribute is to check its
presence in the constructor - or in all constructors, if there are many.

That works in Perl 6 too, but it's easier and safer to require the presence at
the level of each attribute:

    has $.attr = die "'attr' is mandatory";

This exploits the default value mechanism. When a value is supplied, the code
for generating the default value is never executed, and the C<die> never
triggers. If any constructor fails to set it, an exception is thrown.

=head1 MOTIVATION

N/A

=for time 1279805666
=for editor vim: spell
