Google Summer of Code Mentor Recap
<!-- 1220133600 -->
<p>Eric Wilhelm <a
href="http://perlbuzz.com/2008/08/great-results-for-five-perl-projects-in-google-summer-of-code-2008.html">asked
the mentors</a> of the Google Summer of Code projects 2008 to share their
thoughts on the program and their project, so here is my blah.</p>

<p>I mentored Adrian Kreher's project <a
href="http://auzon.blogspot.com/search/label/gsoc2008">Flesh Out the Perl 6
Test Suite</a>, and overall I'm very pleased.</p>

<p>After being talked into becoming a mentor by Jerry "particle" Gay I was a a
little nervous and not really sure if I was up to the task. So I did what my
student would be doing later on: write new tests, review old ones, move them
to the "official" part of the test suite, and adapt them so that Rakudo can
run them (which basically means selectively disabling tests).</p>

<p>On The perl soc mentor's list I found a few links to guides on how to
be a good mentor, which I read and which boil down to "communicate with your
student, run his code and give him some feedback".</p>

<p>So we (my student and I) made contact, scheduled regular meetings on IRC, I
answered a few questions of his, and thus the project began.</p>

<p>Adrian's work was very good in terms of quality, and after a few minor
corrections and nits from my part I made myself mostly superfluous, he worked
on his own. I continued to monitor his commits, filled out the mid term and
end of term surveys, and thusly passed the project for me.</p>

<p>Assessing the work on the test suite is a bit harder than with other
project, because most projects had rather clear goals, whereas in this project
the goal was "clean up the test suite as much as possible". It was clear from
the beginning that Adrian wouldn't be able to make it through the whole test
suite (roughly 900 files, 20k+ tests), so the quantitative goal was to create
and mofify 1000 tests, which was met, as far as measurable.</p>

<p>As stated before I am very pleased both with Adrian's work (which actually
helped the Rakudo developers a lot), and with the whole infrastructure; there
was very little administrative work to do and everybody I dealt with was
friendly and helpful.</p>

<p>So if all works well (enough free time, and proposals which fit my
abilities) I'll surely offer to mentor again.</p>

[% option no-header %] [% option no-footer %]
