Lots of momentum in the Perl 6 community
<!-- 1254257168 -->

<p>Usually I try to tell you something intelligent about Perl 6, but this
night's frustrating hours of debugging very simple mistakes demonstrated that
my wits have left to 90% at least. Still there's the <a
href="http://ironman.enlightenedperl.org/">Iron man blogging challenge</a>, so
I'll write a few lines about something entirely subjective.</p>

<p>If found that there's really momentum in the Perl 6 community, and I'm even
more happy to to observe that people hack on other people's projects.</p>

<p>For example Johan Viklund, co-author of the <a
href="http://november-wiki.org/">November wiki</a> chimed in with the
<code>installed-modules</code> branch of <a
href="http://github.com/masak/proto/">proto</a>, making it usable rather
quickly. Martin Berends jumped on the train that diakopter set off by starting
his new pet project, a Perl 6 interpreter that emits javascript and runs it
through the <a href="http://code.google.com/p/v8/">V8</a> engine (more on that
project in one of the next blog posts).</p>

<p>Solomon Foster joined the Rakudo development and did some very significant
work on the trigonometric functions and the corresponding tests. However it
suffered from rather weird dispatch where some some methods that are defined
in parrot's Complex PMC were not overridable. So today I started a branch
which aims to implement the <code>Complex</code> class completely in Perl 6,
and using the Complex PMC only by delegation through inline PIR. I just ripped
out all the old stuff, and Solomon and I started to re-add them.</p>

<p>On a completely unrelated note I want to point out that <a
href="http://use.perl.org/~masak/journal/39686">we have some SQL support</a>
in Perl 6 now, through Tene's <a
href="http://github.com/tene/perl6-sqlite">perl6-sqlite</a> module.</p>

<img src="/images/blog/proto-projects-list-2009-09-29.png" width="640"
height="480" alt="Number of Perl 6 projects over time" />

<p>The image above shows the development of the numbers of projects known to
proto over time - another indication of the momentum we're gathering.</p>

[% option no-header %] [% option no-footer %]
[% comment vim: set ft=html spell tw=78 : %]

