Monetize Perl 6?
<!-- 1272053637 -->

<p>In some of <a href="http://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=835419">recent
perlmonks</a> <a href="http://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=836349">Perl 6
discussions</a> one of the comments mentioned something along the lines of
<em>Perl 5 is where the money is</em> (I can't find the exact quote in these
monstrous threads...</p>

<p>If money was my primary interest, I wouldn't be hacking Perl 6 as much as I
do - it's mostly just for fun. Still one can speculate on how to earn money
with Perl 6 today - I wouldn't mind having fun with Perl 6 <em>and</em> earn
some money.</p>

<p>In fact, I did that already. I wrote a series of articles for the <a
href="http://www.heise.de/ix/">iX Magazin</a> (together with <a
href="http://plasmasturm.org/">Aristotle Pagaltzis</a>), and while it was
quite some effort, it also payed well. Next up down a similar route is the <a
href="http://github.com/perl6/book/">Perl 6 book</a> that some Perl 6
developers write. It's not primarily written for profit, but there will be
royalties.</p>

<p>I also thought about monetizing this blog - with a few hundred page views
per new entry it might be worth it; still I have some standards as a web
publisher, and find most ads annoying and disturbing, often fitting badly into
the layout. I don't want my readers to suffer for my greed.</p>

<p>What kind of advertisements could actually add value to the site?
Typically programmers read my blogs, and programmers need... jobs, tools,
books and gadgets. I haven't pursued the thought very far yet, but I think
having job ads in text form might be both profitable, maybe interesting and
hopefully not annoying.</p>

<p>What do you, the readers of my blog, think about that? Is there any type of
monetizing that you would enjoy? or if not enjoy, then at least tolerate with
good will? What would you prefer, job ads, geek books, gadgets, or anything
else?</p>

<p>On a related note, do you know any reputable job market for which I can
advertise in text form?</p>

<p>Or any company that would hire me for Perl 6 consulting? :-)</p>

[% option no-header %][% option no-footer %]
[% comment vim: set ft=html : %]
